Original article written by me [[here at
Linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-write-theoretical-research-paper-rathish-chandra-gatti/?published=t+(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-write-theoretical-research-paper-rathish-chandra-gatti/?published%3Dt)){.external_link}]{.qlink_container}:

**How to write a theoretical research paper?**

Often, it is difficult to produce experimentation of certain phenomena
to be stuidied -either those experiments are completely non-feasible
(such as in Quantum physics letters) or there may be resource
limitations (expensive experiments, prolonged time for experimentations,
data collection is labour intensive).

In such cases ,the researcher opts for writing a theoretical research
paper by relying the proof of his hypothesis on simulation o survey
rather than experiment.

Often, theoretical papers are not given sufficient weightage in
engineering journals where the validation is feasible by experiments.
But theretical papers are valuable in basic sciences such as physics
where theoretical frameworks are valid if experiments are not feasible.

A scientific theoretical paper background goes like this -

**1.Introduction -** This section discusses what others have reported in
their research that is relevant to the research topic proposed by the
author. The author also identifies the lacunae or the grey areas that
have not been investigated and thus he is proposing this research.

In the second part of the introduction, the author proposes how he is
going to test his hypothesis which is basically the research methodolog.

**2.Developing a Mathematical Model -** A mathematical model is the
theoretical model of the real system. It is obviously an approximate
representation of the real world. A theoretical model is usually an
under represented model of the real system with assumptions. Simple
mathematical models (linear) are more approximate(or less accurate) and
hence have large deviations from the real world problems compared to the
complex models (non-linear). However, complex models make the
simulations heavy with lot of processing time and memory and hence a
middle approach (neither too simple not too complex) model is suugested.

**3.Theoretical simulation 1 and 2 -** the mathematical model is then
simulated for a series of iterations using two types of numerical
solution methods so that they are comparable against each other. An
example would be to solve a differrential equation using MATLAB and then
cross validating with a FEA results from a FEA package such as ANSYS.

**4.Results and Discussion -** Under results and disccusion , the author
writes about the results of both the simulations, compare te results and
lists the observations. He also highlights what went wrong with the
assumptions, what were the errors and the indentified causes of those
errors.

**5.Conclusions** -This is the last section of the paper. This is
usually a smal paragraph where you will highlight what was intended
before the theoretical simulation and what were the results. You will
also discuss briefly what can b improved. You could discuss the
applications of yur results.You can briefly discuss the future prospects
for this work.

**6.Abstract** - This is the summary of your paper and 1st section of
the paper. This is reserved to be done in the end of the paper.

---
Originally Answered: How does one write a theoretical research paper

[I am not sure what you mean by a \'Theroretical Research Paper\" But if
its something like a thesis here\'s what I use. But before you start
please take the effort of framing your research topic well .It is
extremely important and I cannot stress this enough. For any respected
guide/expert a badly framed title is red flag.\
There are 5 parts to it. 1: Introduction 2: Review of Literature 3:
Research Methodology 4: Analysis 5: Conclusion\
\
1. Introduction: Here is where you write about why the study is
relevant. Give a little bit of context as to what the study is about .
The main objective of this chapter **is to declare the primary and
secondary objectives**. Ideally your primary objective is your research
title and the secondary objective/s are subjects that aid in providing
perspective/addln info to your primary objective.\
\
2. Review of Literature: This is considered important by many and helps
you understand the topic better. Review of literature details all the
reference sources that you have read to gain information/context for
your research.\
**This chapter also aids you to identify similar research carried out by
others.** This enables you to stress how your research is different from
others.\
\
3. Research Methodology: **This chapter lists out your data collection
tools and methods**. This is where you mention stuff like
Quantitative/Qualitative Analysis. You mention the merits and demerits
of each method and how each method will help with the primary or
secondary objective/s.\
\
4.Data Analysis : This would perhaps be the most extensive chapter.
**Here you are grouping and analysing your data**. Till this step you
have a chunk of data that you gathered using various data collection
tools at your disposal. Now you analyse all of those data. Here you
include, graphs, pie charts and other tools to represent the data.\
\
5. Conclusion: This is where you interpret the data. You have a graph
which shows an increasing consumption of X with time?, tell why and why
you think so. \
Make sure that your conclusion is an answer to the research topic. \" A
study on  feasibility\...\...\" Ans: \"This study found it to be
feasible (reasons)\.....\". I hope you get the
idea.]{.ui_qtext_rendered_qtext}
:::
:::

::: {#w19VR9Xq13}
::: {#__w2_w19VR9Xq14_content_footer .AnswerFooter .ReadingContentFooter .ContentFooter}
11.9k views[ · ]{.bullet}[View Upvoters](#){#__w2_w19VR9Xq18_modal_link
.VoterListModalLink}[]{#w19VR9Xq19}[]{#w19VR9Xq21}
:::
:::

::: {#__w2_w19VR9Xq7_survey_wrapper}
:::
:::
